## my primary research questions
1. In what ways do archival technologies (Flickr, IG, Tumblr, Are.na, YouTube,  custom platforms etc) mediate the relationship between users and their data in ways that alter how they think about the contours and affects of memory, ownership, privacy, and capture.

2. How do current data paradigms disturb and restrict our methods of knowledge-making, kin-making, and place-making?

3. How might archival forms of data fugitivity and disobedience serve as methods of designing otherwise?

## intentions with this interview
To discuss epistemic disobedience within library archive collections and reclaiming information sovereignty

## post interview thoughts
- This interview introduced me to the indigenous archiving tool called Mukurtu (https://mukurtu.org/) that works to meet the curatorial and access needs of indigenous peoples for sharing digital cultural heritage. Building an archive on difference allows for paradigms to be designed intentionally
- In her work in the library, there is often metadata that in their very definition, makes normaitve assumptions about how information and knowledge should be labeled and described. For instance, she described a metadata entry field of "author" where in some cases, authorship is quite messy and defined differently. In the labeling process western assumptions are imposed on the subject they try to gather info on which means it fails to capture pluralistic reality and truth. Through this labeling (or flattening) one must "bleach out" the info (direct quote)
- In archival and information studies there is this question about what a document even is. she said in her info science program it was loosely defined as "individual items in an information system" so if its a database of buildings, a document might be a building. Most often documents within archive studies are seen as things like books, flyers, pamphlets, news clippings, etc, but this is not always the case. When I asked her to describe what a "document" was in relation to say "data" she mentioned that they was a contentious question within info sciences. Data, information, knowledge, and wisdom exist on a hierarchy of scope and subjectivity. But all are filtered through various hegemonic apparatus. 
- "a historian is one step away from a journalist" this quote was so interesting to me in thinking about the extractive nature of information collection. She mentioned that in organizing spaces, one of the most important things for people to know about information security is to not talk to journalists. There is a tension there that, yes giving up information to institutional bodies in order to "document" our lives can cause irreparable political ramifications. However, how else will be be remembered? Historians often reach for journalistic accounts of the past to understand what happened, but if we can't trust the people documenting our lives, how will they be remembered? She said something so poignant which was that she hope that in 100 years, if a historian wanted to know about her life, they wouldn't reach for traditional journalistic accounts but to grassroots archives and collections, that actually respect, care for, and steward her documents.
- "deeply cultural embedded archives" leaning on these is more effective at knowing what information is salient. You know that it will be cared for. Within these types of archives, there is a degree of trust, safety, and identity is more carefully kept
- distributed and autonomous archives are inherently local because the stuff inside is not scalable. Its intuitively stewarded.
- Intuition around knowledge seems key here! Beyond embodied knowledge as something to revere itself, there is an embodied sense of how to treat local knowledge as well, which you only learn or acquire through being deeply culturally embedded!
- Regarding databases, I think this notion of them being distributed, autonomous, and culturally embedded is so important.