# Transcript
*note: I reordered and reworded some of the questions as I was interviewing in order for the answers to flow together better. I mostly used my script as a guideline.*

Star: Okay, so the first question was what brought you to NYC Mesh? Like what about the project called to you?

Speaker 2: I mean like if you're asking about like initially what drove me to it kind of unironically it was a revenge. I mean we've all dealt with awful with like really awful shit from RISPs especially like… like during the pandemic my mom's a professor and was teaching remotely but during the pandemic every single day at the same time during her class the internet would cut out for like an hour because of DNS issues and like I had to go through I couldn't even change that in the router I had to go through to every device and change the DNS server that it was using and then immediately what pushed me to it was dealing with an issue with Verizon where they wanted to charge me like $300 to send a technician out to my apartment which is wild but more broadly what drew me to NYC Mesh specifically like outside of that immediate push was just I find the idea of like creating like I hate that there's such a black box on so much of the infrastructure we use on a daily basis like I have no idea about how so much of the things that I depend on every day I have no idea how they work and I think that you know I both I think that leaves you in a very vulnerable state I think that you know that leaves you in a state that's very open to exploitation but also it's like you know I'm just I think that's like kind of harmful to your psyche to to look at the world around you and to not have a good understanding of how it works and so the fact that like that mesh kind of made that infrastructure understandable and noble and under your control in a way that's so little of our lives have become I think that was what was really appealing to me and that obviously the other thing was like oh the good work it does helping people yeah.

Star: Yeah I really resonate with that black boxification part like that was a big I guess encouragement of me and in exploring this I feel like we're so alienated from our technologies

Speaker 2: yeah I have a way better understanding of how computers work than like almost everyone around me yeah and it's still kind of a mystery to me you know yeah 

Star: Absolutely I guess with that could you describe a bit about how NYC mesh and just like a mesh network in general works broadly?

Speaker 2: I mean mesh networking is kind of a really broad term that can refer to a lot of different things but kind of broadly it refers to systems which which interconnect with each other right you think about it in terms of like you might have like a mesh Wi-Fi Wi-Fi network where different routers are all broadcasting the same SSID and you're able to switch from one to the other in order to have a continuous experience so like you know you might have that in like a house or like on a college campus something that where you'd like you don't want to be reconnecting to the Wi-Fi when moving around but like you're able to still you're able to still use the same same network you know it might be referring to like you know mesh task that goes like another great great example of that where like since each device on the network connects is able to repeat messages from the other ones you're able to get a message from one area to another distant area through that even if you don't have a connection for NYC mesh it's you know the machine part specifically is about how like essentially you can connect through your neighbors and so like you know you part of what makes the mesh so powerful is that when you set up your node you agree to allow other people to use your connection as well and so even if for infrastructure reasons you can't connect directly to one of our hubs you can still get a connection to your neighbor for more broad overview of how the mesh itself works so we start with the data centers where there are these things called they're called Internet exchange points which are these massive data centers where all of the the major players and networking have infrastructure and then in those are called our places called Internet exchange rooms which are just rooms where like everyone connects to each other through this process called peering where you like you run your cables between each other's equipment and this is essentially what the internet like that room is essentially what the internet is where all these different discrete network connect to each other and form this giant mesh and so you know like NYC mesh peers with Google so you're connecting to Google through the mesh you you know it can go directly through them but if you're connected to something that we don't have a computer they met with and it can go out through the open Internet on these large you know on these with these companies that have like these fiber cables that run all over the world and it can go through that in order to connect to it and then from there there are high speed antennas are used either on the roof of those buildings or they they have fiber cables that run to different buildings which transmit it and then on there each of those have and have further antennas that connect to hubs such as large buildings in neighborhoods which have antennas on them which broadcast it down onto the neighbor onto the rooftops above and then you can then connect you can use an antenna called an sxt to connect to your neighbors or the standard router will also do that although it's much less powerful and the machine thing makes it much makes expansion much more flexible because instead of needing a central infrastructural hub to connect through you can simply connect you can simply connect through your neighbor and it can sort of spread out through communities like that.

Star: That’s so interesting in like the way that it’s able to expand through people opting into the system like consenting to not just offering up their building but they're participating in the network as a whole. Like that underlying value is something that I think is so beautiful.

Speaker 2: yeah I think a lot of people like they don't really they come into this just like not really understanding that aspect of it and thinking of it like oh this is just how I connect to the internet but it like because it's this automatic in order to access it you must agree to like participate in the system it puts it people confront like the fact that they're you know this is this is like shared infrastructure and when they're joining them they're becoming part of this shared network with all of their neighbors people who they might not even have met yeah I think that's it's really cool yeah 

Star: For people who have been interested in participating in the shared type of network versus a more traditional hierarchical network, what are the differences you notice in like how they feel connected to their community

Speaker 2: yeah I mean for the traditional ISPs it's just you you know there's zero connection with your community you are a great customer and it's sort of actually something that a lot of people don't realize is that you do share a lot of that infrastructure with your neighbors though you know it's even though they sort of treat it as like your discreet customer and you have you know this much bandwidth the ISPs engage in this process called oversubscribing where they have more customers like with more bandwidth than they can actually handle everybody were to actually try to use the amount of bandwidth they were theoretically purchasing then it would bring the network down it wouldn't it simply wouldn't be able to handle it and so you're still actually participating in a shared system it's just the ISPs are trying to hide that you know they're trying to get you to view yourself as participating in a system as an individual rather than as a community you know a lot of like what NYC Mesh is doing is sort of exposing how as an individual accessing the internet you are still part of that community we're making that sort of that aspect of it which is shared visible to me and you know hopefully getting them to realize like you know my you know my life is bound up in the lives of my neighbors I can't simply I get to be hold up in my apartment and you know not think about the lives of the people around me the thing is that we yeah so I think getting people to think of their lives yeah think of like the quality of their lives is being bound up in their neighbors I think is a large part of what NYC Mesh is trying to do. 

Star: Do you have any stories like interacting with people who you've installed a mesh node at their location about someone realizing their position within this shared network? Like they've made that connection for the first time or like they had a difference in the way they thought about yeah like their relationship with internet infrastructure. 

Speaker 2: Yeah I think one of my favorite stories I have is so I was over the summer I set up a hub on this building in Bushwick and I was working with there the building's tenant union in order to like get members signed up and this tenant union this has been a situation where like a few years ago the building went on rent strike and they won and the tenants union is still around but because they had won all these years back they're not nearly as active before it's sort of just mostly the old timers in the building still keeping this institution going so we were working with them and there were a handful of people in the building who had moved in more recently and weren't involved in the neighbors that were interested in this project. And through this, a couple of them, but especially this, especially one of them, was really excited with it and became very active. And through this got to know their neighbors and like, you know, started meeting other people in the building and like becoming more part of the social scene. So it's really cool seeing this, this happens where it's just like, you know, he went from not knowing his neighbors to all of a sudden, you know, he has, he's friends with his neighbors and he has this shared experience. And he sees, you know, and he's able to experience the power of cooperating with your neighbors in order to achieve a goal.

Star: Oh, that's so amazing. And it's beautiful in seeing the connection as well with tenant organizing as well, just in general, having this sense of shared ownership about all of our infrastructures, housing, internet, like all of it being a connected thing. That is so cool.

Speaker 2: This is also true about pretty much everything else, you know, like, a landlord that like neglects building repairs. For one tenant is also probably doing it for everybody else, you know, like the water infrastructure we rely on and sewage and electricity, all of that is shared infrastructure. But I think the world is very oriented towards getting ourselves to view us as like individual customers with no connection or solidarity, but the people around us. Yeah, 100%. 

Star: Okay, as a side question, something I've been thinking about a lot is the idea of hyper local technological infrastructure. I'm curious, do you have opinions on the value of having community owned, like larger infrastructure versus use cases where maybe more hyper local types of infrastructure would be better, like say one house running off a solar panel, you know, versus like a community owned broader solar system, if that makes sense. 

Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, I think, yeah. I think generally, there's value in both. Like, I think you need both types of things. I think there's this easy reaction to the state of the world. And seeing how we have all these, the world seeming to get worse has coincided with the rise of these giants, you know, this technological innovation, and it's easy to correlate the two. 

And that's not entirely wrong. But I think there are also good things that come about that sort of thing. Like, part of what like very hyper local technology does is it is it exists in a situation with a lot of context, where like, it's easy to understand and, you know, have people might like, you know, people are are more likely to have context for, you know, what's going on in our lives and how things work. But they also think, like, I think it's easy to treat context as a pure good thing. But sometimes, like, being able to approach something with a fresh, fresh set of eyes and without assumptions can also be a very positive thing. 

I think so many injustices in our world have been justified with assumptions of like, oh, that's just how things work. And like, the fact that the internet has exposed us to the things that we might not have seen before, we might only have seen in the context where the information was being filtered through people with an agenda. That has yielded some very positive things. But it's also yielded some very negative things. And that, you know, without context, things that might be totally innocuous, can seem weird and off putting, or even harmful and cause negative reactions from people when that's not justified. I think I'll add about how like, you know, the whole, the whole idea of like the Twitter character of the week, where it's just like, you're taking a tiny fragment of someone's life and I've been exposing that to massive numbers of people. And like, of course, things are going to go badly when that happens. You could do that for everybody. 

And, you know, you could find a tiny fragment of everybody's life and use that to make them look bad. Absolutely. But yeah. I think both are important. yeah, I think there's no clean answer there. 

Star: That makes sense, like finding the balance being hard but thank you. Okay. Okay, last couple questions.

I think I mentioned a bit before but I talked a lot about legibility, the idea of being clear and understandable by the “algorithm”. So I guess the question is, has there been a time in the past, like, maybe a month or so where it felt like a piece of technology that you were interacting with like your phone and app, like whatever was trying to identify or clarify who you are, or like some part of your identity? 

Speaker 2: Oh, I mean, literally all the time, you know, we build like a massive apparatus around like mass buying on people. And, like, in a way that's generally, I think, probably pretty negative, like being better able to advertise to people or like, you know, being able to be exposed to governments or surveillance on a mass scale, especially right now. 

I think it is obviously very harmful. And I think it feels like I'm in a constant war with every single piece of technology I own that always wants to gather my personal information in order to do those things. It feels like something I'm constantly being exposed to. Yeah. Yeah. 

And especially like, so I just, I just moved. And so, you know, I just got like, my home network set backup. And part of what I had running on my old network is an ad guard home, which is a DNS based ad tracking blocker. And so over the past month, I've been exposed to like, Oh, a lot of these things I'm used to being able to see without ads. And, you know, like, I, I like can look at like the blocked, you know, addresses that it's going to be C. I'll be trackers. And like, even though I that's something that's pretty invisible, I am aware it's there. And like, it's something that on my mind as I'm using a technology. 

Star: Mm hmm. The relationship between this like comfort in what your technology knows about you and like privacy, security, and trust feels resonant here. I guess, what would you say is the relationship between these types of privacy and security measures and trust and intimacy? Like, does incorporating these types of privacy security measures make you feel more or less trustworthy about your tech?

Speaker 2: I mean, I think being like, being aware of the fact that all of the technology I use is constantly trying to track me. You know, it makes me very self conscious. And it makes me aware that like, well, all of this is being recorded. All of this could be leaked. You know, I could, you know, who knows who's able to see all of this information that's being gathered. 

And so I feel less. I feel a lot less comfortable using technology when I'm not when I know that I'm constantly being watched and surveilled every movement, every action that I'm doing is being surveilled because like, what if I do something that embarrasses myself or exposes myself in some way. And so, like, I think, you know, we've all had this experience of like the mass proliferation of cameras just everywhere. And I think, you know, people need the ability to, you know, be able to act weird and different. And we want to do it without being watched. I think that's a pretty natural reaction. And so I think knowing that you're under near constant surveillance makes you a lot less comfortable being weird or being yourself in how you interact with technology. Yeah, that's real. 

Star: What do you think would have to be different about the technologies that you use, just all of this type of infrastructure, in order for you to be able to feel like you can let yourself feel fully comfortable, loved, seen, and like connected in the way that you would with like a friend or like a loved one? like what would have to be different about the technology.

Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that's a good question. I feel like a lot of it is like, I need to feel a greater sense of control over the technology I use on a day to day basis. I need to feel like, you know, I could, you know, I have some control over who is seeing what I'm doing online, or like how I'm using the technology on a day to day basis. You know, I have some confidence that like I won't say something online and suddenly like an entire audience that I never intended to see that is able to view it and like, you know, they may not have the context for who I am or the life I'm living in the culture I'm in. And yeah, so I think having that, like, sort of specificity and control over the audience that you're engaging with and having the control over the technologies you're using. Obviously, there's a certain level to which that's like, that will never be perfect, right? Like, that's even true for things you're doing in person where like, you know, you may not know everybody who's watching you all the time. And like, it may be that someone, you know, an outsider might see you do is doing something and judge you for that. But I think that's very different where online, it's, it's in such a larger context that can really blow up very quickly. And so, you know, I think it's it mainly boils down to like, that sense of control. Yeah, I think a lot of it is just like, individual control and community control.

Star: Sick. Okay. Thank you so much again for participating in the interview, I want to emphasize again that I was recording this, but any like personally identifying anything will be like erased and obscured. And then again, like after the semester, I’ll like take my notes and everything and delete all the recordings. But just to emphasize that again. 

Speaker 2: Yeah, that all sounds great
