## my primary research questions
1. In what ways do archival technologies (Flickr, IG, Tumblr, Are.na, YouTube, custom platforms etc) mediate the relationship between users and their data in ways that alter how they think about the contours and affects of memory, ownership, privacy, and capture.

2. How do current data paradigms disturb and restrict our methods of knowledge-making, kin-making, and place-making?

3. How might archival forms of data fugitivity and disobedience serve as methods of designing otherwise?

## intentions with this interview
Understand how Black archives and community-stewarded archives differ from traditional archives. Investigating the relationship between Black Radical Tradition and archival methods. Learning more about the specifics of archival methods and what the day to day looks like.

## post interview thoughts
The beauty in this for me was thinking about knowledge as something that is inherently dialogic and evolving, not static. I think that is often a preconception or misunderstanding of archives that they exist in dusty old collections and remain in the past. At the Black Archives, the place being used as a community space just as much as its used as an archive (as the archivist stated is pretty common within community-run archives), there's a encouragement to regularly engage with the material, understanding your relationality to it.

photos, writin, and oral/voice came forth as the primary modes of archive materials. For their personal archives, using tools like Tumblr allowed for a collection of text and images, and then writing alongside collections became a way to stimulate analysis and exploration of these materials, then later these writings becoming a part of their personal archives itself.

The compelling thing about grassroots archives here is the specificity and control that community members have over how they are remembered and how they go through the process of rememory. This includes not just having the archives available but having events, talks, activities, etc that engage community members through connecting with the archives at a deeper level.

We archive things because we want to preserve them in our collective memory. If we don’t, we risk their physical essence and imprint on our psyche fading away. What was interesting here was that while there is this desire to have a grip on our memories, it is a radical act to let their physical forms go through cycles of decomposition and ensure that they stay alive through other means. I also find there to be an interest link here with the idea of digital decay where website and physical storage information is removed, outdated, or otherwise dies and we lose access to our online data and memories. We want to archive online because it feels more permanent, spacious, and reliable, however because we lack real control over these platforms, we may have even less control over how our memories are stored and how we interact with them.

There are very clear and personal decisions around what someone chooses to capture or note. This reflects their viewpoint, values, and perspective about the world around them. While this is true for people collecting documents and memories, it is also true for archival institutions and technology institutions, making specific decisions about what is “worth” capturing and holding ownership of, and what is not.

Relationality came through as a core tenant of radical archiving. Specifically this looking like building an intimate relationship with the archival materials you are engaging with, seeing yourself in them, and connecting them to your lineage and history. It also contained elements of engaging with others through the archives, understanding them from various points of view. I really liked how intimate of a practice this felt like. We get to know ourselves, our communities, and these documents in deeper and more intimate ways when we practice this relationship with them. There also was a lot in how much of ourselves lives in the things we collect and choose to archive. The documents we archive and the method in which we archive exist on a spectrum of levels of intimacy, highlighting vulnerability in accessing, capturing, and observing existing archives. I’d be interested to think a bit more about ideas of relationality and intimacy in how we share and study data about each other

This upholds a lot of the other reading and thinking I have been doing about technological mediation. There needs to be this clarity and preciseness within how these platforms organization information. Even if its not binary data but documents, photos, and text, there still is a preciseness and a flatness required in the capturing process. I find it interesting how much that is embedded in how the metadata and tag systems are designed. I also find it compelling to think about how the norms of how data is organized and tagged are set by hegemonic institutions. Here the archivist talks about how in order to remain legible to the general public, they need to follow conventions of tagging that were set by white dominant libraries. Disturbing that makes it hard to scale and remain accessible in some ways, but I wonder what it would look like to completely reject those models?

I find it fascinating how often people reach for technology as an equalizer and a tool for bridging gaps. I think it is totally true that online space collapses the confines of physical space and allows the world to become that much smaller. I think that also requires further abstraction away from source material and localities. However, I suppose this abstraction (in a far more violent way) is what took these documents out of their contexts to begin with.

What does it mean to pass on information, knowledge, documents, and data? We hold this information in our bodies and we use containers and vessels external to ourselves to transport it to other means.

In this, I’m thinking about alternative modes of sharing information from a fugitive perspective. Alternative mapmaking through cornrowing paths in your hair. Coming up with characters and folklore to describe approaches and methods of navigating live. What would it mean for a dataset or database to be built on folklore?

Dialogue feels hard because it often requires some type of guiding and shepparding, especially when someone is new to the archival materials or information. There’s a desire to have your eye be directed at least at first before you get the hang of things. I suppose that’s where the importance of intimacy with the data comes in. You gain that intimacy and relationality through dialogue.

So this example talked about archival materials from Suriname being held and discussed about in the Netherlands, removed from their original contexts. This is making me think about diaspora, I suppose in these materials existing in the Netherlands, unique and situated relations with the archives emerge, divergent from what would be discussed in Suriname. Maybe things don’t always need to be situated around their origins? I also think about how digital archives still exist in physical space, like yes the actual documents may exist here in the Netherlands, and the documents are from Suriname originally, but their digitized forms now live in some data server somewhere, unknown to the archivist or the subject of the archives.

Context matters! There being limitations to how we interpret the archives exists beyond physical and digital means. We make choices about what to capture and how based on the limits of reality (time, funding, etc) but we can never truly know the full story. Maybe that is not the point?

Values of an ideal Radical Black Archive is just one built on trust, reliability, and love. Holding information with care and regard for their contexts and purposes.

This is such an important way to think about the limits of the archives. I listened to another lecture about the archive as being full of dead things, or where things go to die. This element of critical fabulation feels key to keeping things alive! We don’t engage in enough critical fabulation around data that is gathered about us or predictive models (which are doing their own type of fabulation through normalization)

I see this as another form of dialogue but just with yourself. Thinking about how you relate to and are impacted by the archives.
We select what we think is important and frame our understanding of the world and its information as such. When approaching the archives or data, it is important to orient yourself around your own positionality. This feels necessary for a pluralistic archive, a pluralistic dataset.

Other ways that we can hold knowledge, hold data, and hold wisdom! Photos and text are such a small part of the way that we can hold information! What would other containers look like?

I was very fascinated by this concept, allowing things to go through cycles of decay and regeneration! I think often with data and digital information, we want things to exist forever, We assume that we have infinite space and energy and that because it’s “not physical” there is nothing to die. Finality on the internet feels like an unexplored thing. How to build this into a database? Not just decay, but creating methods to regenerate as well!

I love the use of the phrase “no grip” in relation to ownership. The feeling that things are slipping out of our fingers or possession. Having control over how your documents are held and being able to refuse or migrate are fundamental digital security concerns. I know that in this project and research, data sovereignty and security is key.