Speaker 1  
Okay, obviously, I've heard a lot about your work with, like, the black archives and stuff, but I guess do you want to give a general, like, especially, like, what are the things that you do have done as an archivist? Like, archivist? Yeah. Yeah.

Speaker 2  
So I started working at the black archives. Okay, actually, no, it started before that. So when I in my undergrad, I got introduced to archives in 2022, when I followed gender and sexuality, and then I was involved with the archive atria in Amsterdam, which is like a woman archive. And then for, yeah, for my final project, like, I did a lot of, like, research, I think, for maybe two weeks that I was there, like every day, like going through archives of social movements. And that's kind of where my interest was piqued, because then I realized how cool this to go through archives. And then in 2023, the end of 2023

Speaker 2  
then I started working at the black archives in Amsterdam, which is a grassroots organization and is very focused on, it's more like a community archive, very focused on bringing people together, educating People and yeah, there I was mostly involved with, like, the activities around the archive. And when I was really like, going in the archive was when I worked at the need for legacy, which was, like a few months later, like the beginning of 2024 and there, this is also a grassroots organization in Amsterdam that focuses on the performance history of color, and it's quite a young organization, so we were really trying to figure out how to best archive histories of color, and for that, one archive that we were going through was from Thea dovet, who was like a surnamese theater maker from the 70s, and it was very radical. Her theater plays and like critiques on the on the, those current political climate what was happening, and then I wrote, like a archival plan on how to best do that. So that's yeah, kind of my experience working and currently doing archive work for my thesis.

Speaker 1  
How much of your personal life also involves archiving? Would you say?

Speaker 2  
Yeah, I think much more now that I'm also doing like this archival work and going through like personal archives when like activists and like, yeah, people were very important for certain social movements,

Speaker 2  
I think like, I started becoming aware of archiving when I would travel, because then, yeah, I don't know if you're traveling, then you're more aware of like, Oh, it's so temporary. And I want everybody to capture everything and capture my experience.

Speaker 2  
So I started making like Tumblr page and also like apps, like folder steps, where just like post a lot of pictures and blogs and, yeah, but also just archiving through writing. I think that's something I'm doing the most now that I'm also here in the US and doing all this, like I just write a lot, just processing everything that I do ideally, yeah, so I think that's my mode, currently, my biggest Like way of archiving.

Speaker 1  
I'm very I'm as a semi follow up question, something that I've been thinking about a lot is how just photos, and we take so many photos, it's very easy to like snap like a million photos. Is in a day. But as someone who works with and assume like like photos within archives and seeing them as like a full picture of like an event or like a memory, what would you say is the relationship between photos and, I guess, as a secondary thing, text as well, in like, collective memory, yeah.

Speaker 2  
I think photos are so insightful to really like have, yeah, more of an image of what that person just how that person like, express it obviously, like, depends on what the photo is, but, yeah, currently I'm going through this archive of Hermina heisfeld, who was an activist during the heart of Renaissance, and I went through like, the photo archive, and then I found these photos of Her and I think a friend, it wasn't really like names and her husband being in this, like little like house in a in the woods in the Netherlands, and just pictures of them just relaxing and just like her sitting like on a tree. And it's just like, I was like, wow. Like, I love this so much, because, like, everything is, like, pretty serious, from what I find in her archive. And then to just find these pictures of her just relaxing and booking, like a little getaway house or Cabin in the Woods was just really wholesome to see. And also, yeah, it is so much to kind of my imagination about her life. So I think that is just how, how that like, yeah, there's so much to the imagination of trying to understand somebody's work or life and lifestyle and choices. But then with the writing, I found this a beautiful document of her, where she wrote, like, how many pages was 88 pages about woman that she had, woman that she met throughout her life. And it would sometimes be like a really close friend, but other times, someone that she just saw once and had one conversation with, she would like, write out a whole word spread about that person.

Speaker 2  
And, yeah, I think like writing can say so much already about what someone even finds important to like, put on a page and like, capture and save that she found it important to like, sketch all these women, and wanting to like, remember these women is like, so significant to me, and says so much about what she found important and what she noticed. And yeah, I also feel like when I write to I too. It's like ideas come to me while I write, and it also feels sometimes even more personal than like talking, because, like, sometimes it's easier to write something down than like talk about it. So I feel like, if you really like, find like written records of somebody, it feels very intimate to go through that and go through their thoughts and what they thought was important to write down.

Speaker 1  
The focus on choice and intentionality and seeing the world or like, these moments through that one person's like perspective is really interesting. I'm curious. What does an archive like, digital or physical look like that specifically values black imaginaries? What are its features?

Speaker 2  
Yeah, I mean, this is like something that, yeah, I don't think I have like, a full answer on but I can think about like, certain aspects of it. I think for me, I would say it needs to, like, revolve around care and relationality and being very accessible. At the conference I was at, there was actually one panel about archives and like black archives, and then they were also saying how they would have like copies of every like record so that people could like. Like, really, like, hold the copies. Because, like, if you have the originals, it is so, like, hard to, like, engage with it, because you need to be super careful. And so these, like, I don't know, like restrictions to it. And then this was, like, from the archive in Sweden, and they said, like, yeah, be fun. It's very important to have like copies so that people can actually, like, hold it and engage with it. The black archives in Amsterdam, like, can also send a lot to you online. So I think accessibility and also, also in the way that it is, like, easy for people to find. So I think the length of things, like archives can feel so ominous and so like vague, like the archive, like, what is in there? It feels kind of like you're going through, I don't know, a secret cave or something, and a lot for it's not accessible for a lot of people, but I do think it should, yeah, there should be like, ways to make it more accessible. And I think that's like a continuous conversation of how we can think about doing that. But I think that should be, like, a really big value. And then another thing is intergenerationality, because, yeah, like, archive like older people are literally archives. Anyways, we're like, we're all archives like, in our like embodied experiences and wisdoms and just knowledge that we have, and especially when you, like, think about black archives or black imaginaries, like oral history is such a big part of that, and embodied, embodied knowledge is such a big Part of that as well, like it cannot always be captured in just pictures and text. It's like told through stories and storytelling and or through performance or dance or music. There's so many different, yeah, mediums to even spread information, or knowledge or histories. So, yeah, I think it should be, like, really important to have conversations between generations, have like exchanges between generations. And, yeah, make it accessible for different generations, too. And then also, just like, really young people, for example, like children, like, yeah. I mean, how beautiful would it be to just have children walking through archives and like, I think also the way that people engage with it should also be an aspect that, like the conversations around it and the dialog around it, should also be important to make an archive more alive, I think.

Speaker 1  
I guess, yeah, leading back to the imaginary thing as people engage with the material in that, like, dialogic way, it's like, yeah, playing with the imaginary. You said something in particular about accessibility. I think technology is often depicted as something that is used to make things more accessible, but I also recognize there's a lot of limitations and ways that our collections are flattened and Like limited with like the digital so I'm curious, first, the way that technologies that the way that technologies have been used within your work with archives and like, storing information, sharing them. And then as like Part B, of the question, how much of the work that you've done as revolved around, like tangible, like physical documents and items, versus like digital born type of things?

Speaker 2  
So when I was working for the need for legacy, this performance archive, this was, like a really big team, because we had basically, like, I don't know, maybe like, six moving boxes of documents and stuff and scripts and pictures of this theater director from Suriname in Amsterdam, and then it already, like, had this complication of like, Okay, we're gonna go through it and we're gonna, like, organize it and catalog it, but then it shouldn't be just accessible in the Netherlands, because it's literally an archive from Suriname. So like people in Suriname need to have access to it. So then, like you immediately start to think about like a digital archive, and digitize, digitizing the materials. So that was like a really big theme, and I think like going through the archive and like cataloging, it was already like such a complex process, because we would have like a team of four people, and we would have, like, constantly conversations about how to like organize something, or how to catalog something. Like, there's so much decisions involved in that, and then, like, some decisions that we would make. We would, for example, also be in contact with this white archive, archival institution that has existed for like decades, and they showed us, like, their archival plan. And I would like, basically go through that and then see, like, Okay, what is something that we want to like, build further on, and what is something that we really want to let leave out? And then wanted examples, for example, that traditional archives, like, they destroy things from the archive if they don't think that it's like, valuable or, yeah, or, yeah, of interest, which is, of course, like, pretty harmful when white people do that about like histories of color, because who decides what is like, valuable or not? So then we decided, like, okay, we're not gonna, like, destroy anything. So, like, decisions like that. We were constantly in conversation. And then, yeah, that was, like, the first step, because then we needed to, like, catalog it, and eventually that gets translated to something digital. But yeah, it was, it was complex. At some point we were like, Okay, we want to flag it when something is a trigger warning. But then that became a discussion, because when is something triggering? Like there were like these, like colonial ships, like picture or something, and someone from the team would say that was triggering, right? Other people would be like, No, we need to stick to actual, like, sexual trauma or racism or but, yeah, already the question of like, okay, but when is something racially triggering? It's everything is so incredibly subjective. So yeah, it's just really, like, hard. And I think like, we probably made a lot of, like, we probably could have done a lot of things differently, but it's just like a process that you need to, like, kind of constantly make decisions in.

Speaker 2  
And yeah, I think like, that is what I kind of, like, lost the point of, like, your question, but like, I think, like, more about it, like, the technology, yeah, so, yeah, like, eventually, like, I wasn't in the process of actually translating into the digital but we did Keep, like, this spreadsheet where we, like, call a lot, collect everything, and we were like, looking at different formats and different like, how different archives would do it. So we were like, constantly, like, kind of getting inspiration and thinking about helps. Best bring it to people. There's this one archive that is like, focused on Indonesia in the Netherlands, like the colonialism in Indonesia, Dutch colonialism, and they would have, like, on their website, would have oral histories. So they would like have videos of like elders, like talking about their experiences. So in that way, like I was like, Oh, wow, that can be like, really, also extending the idea that we have of an archive on the archival website. Yeah, but yeah, it definitely gets flattened either way, and it's just such a subjective process. Like, currently, I'm also for the Center. I work for the Center for black visual culture from NYU, not archiving, but I'm like cataloging books. And then with every book that I catalog, I need to make like tags for if people like have certain search words that the book will show up. And that is already like, so difficult. And then I would like see how other libraries have, what other libraries have for the same book, like, what text and then, like, all the books that are focused on, like, a black narrative, it just says, like, African American story, and then that's it. But it doesn't, like, specify anything else, yeah. And I'm already like, wow, this is, like, so interesting, because then, like, people, it's so much harder for people to even find it. So that's also, like, a way of how it gets super flattened. But also it's really hard to, like, move the time that you have for it, because, like, I cannot read all the books to be like, Oh, it should be about these words, so yeah. And that way it also gets like flattened, you know. But I do see also the value of, for example, that it like reaches like Caribbean countries, and that reaches like overseas, also keeping in mind that, like a lot of there's so much funding in the Netherlands for these types of projects, and not in like the countries what the histories are about. So then you, if you don't like, make it accessible for overseas. It constantly stays in, like, the country of the colonizers, right? So that way I really see, like, how important it is to have digital access. But I think, like, even the physical access becomes very limiting just because of the choices you need to make.

Speaker 1  
This part about place, like making things accessible across borders is really interesting to me. I think a lot about the internet as a place that we occupy, and it feels like everything is like hyper visible, or there's this, like, demand for everything to be visible and understood and like clear. With knowledge, I'm curious about decisions that communities make around what not to share, or what to keep secret or private. And so within archives, if a community is like, Oh, I don't want this information to be held, especially by like, a with a white institution or Western institution, how do you reckon with like? The need for like, protecting knowledge and how like local, local knowledge production is like occurs, and like trying to fill the gaps in the archive as well. Because sometimes we just have to, like, we just don't know.

Speaker 2  
Yeah, I'm thinking about something now, but please let me know if I don't answer your question, but I read this, like article for the summer that was about this exhibition in the Netherlands by like this queer, like, big, white institution, institutional archive. And they did this like exhibition about, like, pride in the Netherlands. I think this was, this is already, like, a while ago. It was maybe like 2015 and then they to make that exhibition. They like, reached out to a lot of like, just knowledge holders from the community, and they would like share all their resources with them, and share, like, a lot of like documents that they had about the whole like, black pride legacy, basically in the Netherlands. But then when they, like, eventually made the exhibition like they like, included like, 20% of what they told them, and like, it wasn't like, a good representation at all. And then this became, like a really big discussion of, like, okay, like, do we? Just because this caused so much distrust with every these institutions and these big white archives, even if it is queer, that, like a lot of like, activists who were involved in this project. We're just like, over it basically, and just like, Yeah, I don't think we can, like, trust these institutions, and we should just, like, do our own, like grassroots, like archives, and just have this like response to these, to these white institutions. Yeah, yeah. And basically this question of like as like communities of color, can we even like trust these white institutions to care for our documents and knowledge and that they like keep that safe. And I think this is like a bigger question I'm like thinking about, because also with the history of archives, it's always been like that, like institutions will basically, like, have these documents at the cost of black communities and not for black communities, or have black communities imagined it's more it is basically like this legacy of colonialism and just wanting to have it as like, I don't know, for not the right reasons or like, not the reasons To like, serve communities and care for communities. So Black archives as a response are usually as a response in a response to this and to have this goal of relationality and care and representation and spreading of knowledge and information to to to and within our communities, can you repeat the question?

Speaker 1

So balancing that within the archives, balancing, the need to have, like, a full, representative understanding of something versus allowing people to also refuse to share and to remain invisible, how do you approach that?

Speaker 2

I think like, I think that desire of wanting to know everything is understandable, but I think it's not really something that can ever be fully fulfilled, because, yeah, like, even if, Like, someone would get all my journals right now, like it's just three pages I write about a day you don't know everything about that day. Like it's always, like a curated part of that reality that you find. And yeah, like I right now I'm like, going through these letters from Langston Hughes to Hermina Hersfeld, and he wrote, like so many letters over like, a period of 30 years to her. And then I was like, talking to my advisor about this, and I was like, yeah, like, I just wish I could see her answers to him, you know, because I just want to know what she what she answered, and just feeling that desire of like, I want to know the full picture. And then my advice was just like, okay, but like, you can also just leave it. You can also just like, work with what you have and use, like, critical fabulation. And just write about what these documents or these letters just do with you. And yeah, that's another part of like zoom archival work, like also being aware how it changes you throughout the process. Because, like, I don't know that going three times for to the same archive, by the third time, you're already looking with very different eyes and knowledge than the first time, and being very aware and reflective of your own thought processes about things too. Like I always try to like journal also about my process and what I was thinking and feeling and like when I was going through her archive, like she had a lot of like, international relations, and then I was like, reflecting on how that also made me think about my own like friendships overseas and like, then I would write that down, because it's like relevant to know what top thoughts come up for me, or what like personal associations come up for me, because that changes how I look at the at the material. If, like someone else who doesn't have that looks at the same materials, they're not going to have those associations, and we'll draw different conclusions. But because I can, like, find some similarity in the same experience that way. That changes how I see and read and experience that material. So I think basically, to come back to your question of like, you don't always have to, like, have the full picture. And I think it is, yeah, it's okay if people decide not to like put everything in an archive. And I think it's also a very colonial way of desiring to have everything and to know everything, and also to even think that you can know everything through documents, because you get you don't know, like documents are, like just one, like experience, one side of a full experience, like it's not you already don't have certain body experience then, or the ancestral experience, or like spiritual experiences, like You cannot capture everything just in a written document, but it can obviously also bring out a lot. But, yeah, I don't know. Just to know it's okay to not have everything. I don't think that's even like possible.

Speaker 1

I'm thinking about how the way that we think about data in like the digital space, and how our data is treated is so extractive. It's like any possible place to collect, which feels like a direct relationship with, like, the colonial understanding of information of just like collected hoard all these things. So I think it's really interesting for you to engage with the with these stories from a place of like, what is my subjective like experience with this, what's my relationship with the material? You also mentioned, like grassroots things. Do you have more to say about that? Or have like, any examples?

Speaker 2

Yeah, yeah. I mean, you're talking a little bit about it before, but the Black archives in Amsterdam is Yeah, an archive that is very dear to my heart. It's yeah, I think it's more it's yeah, actually more like a community space. And I think that is what usually happens a lot when it starts out as a grassroots organization. And yeah, like the founders of the archive, they would like say, like, yeah, like we have books and we have documents, but that's not our main priority. Our main priority is to like, keep and keep a human rights movement going, and to really like bring knowledge to communities that this knowledge is not always very accessible to or just very, yeah, suppressed. And that was something that's very much related to me, because I when I was like six, no, probably 17/18, um, 18, I would go to their archive and would go to events, and it has played such a major role in my whole like political state, political station, yeah, and just my political opinions and values and just everything my work and gave me much better sense of self and identity, and I found a lot of community there that I still have am in contact with. Hmm, and it just brought me so incredibly much just to go, go there, and to have, like, a physical space that addresses Black history is just already so revolutionary. And, yeah, so I think, and that's like, yeah, the same with that other organization they need for their legacy that is about performance history. Like they were also really focused on community, and making this community of theater makers and actors of color and making this like safe haven for them, because it's like a very violent field as well for actors of color, and yeah, to to show them like, wow, there like, were people before you who did This. You're not the first one who goes through these experiences in this, like performance field, but there's like, a legacy of people who are standing behind you and have done, like, radical work in this and made space for you to be doing this. But also, yeah, can relate to this. And I think that's also what the black archives like communicates like it gives you.

Speaker 2

It can, like, really show you how you do not have to internalize your experience or think that it's just you going through that, but you can suddenly get clarity on like certain structures that are in place, and make sure that you have that racist experience and but also learn about how people Have always resisted, resisted those structures and systems. And, yeah, I think that is just the biggest like difference with traditional archives, because it's really focused on people and on basically politicizing someone's consciousness, which is, in my opinion, like literally, most powerful thing you can do. And then another archive I'm thinking about, and I have just recently learned about, is the black archive in Sweden. And I went to this talk of the founder, and she was basically talking about the concept of anti futures, which is okay, so the context of this is that in Scandinavian countries, blackness is really, like, it's like, denied in Europe in general, but in the Scandinavian countries, it's like a next level, like, there's like, not a lot of funding for these types of projects, because blackness is just not acknowledged, or black communities are not acknowledged in those countries. So to then make a physical space already resist that whole narrative, and resist all those like dominant structures in that country just by existing. But that also makes it really difficult to, of course, keep doing the work if you can barely get any funding. And then she was basically talking about this idea of anti futures, that if we think about white, traditional institutional archives, they started archiving for Colonial purposes and at the cost of black people. And she was like, if a black archive is a direct response and resistance to this, we cannot do it with the same purpose that we want to have this information forever, or have the goal of existing forever, we need to imagine that maybe there won't be a future for this archive, and that to exist forever is maybe not even the purpose. And then, of course, this feels very like, I know for a lot of people, this brings up tension, because it's like, oh, but we want the archives to exist forever and to have this knowledge available forever. So people would be like, okay, but then what happens if the archive, the black archives, dies? And then she would say, well, then I would trust. That the black archives lives forth in people, and this for it in, like, people's bodies and at people's homes, and that someone else will start it again. And I thought this was like, I've literally been thinking about this for a week, because this felt so radical to me to like, think about anti futures and think about that it should even be our purpose to exist forever, but that we should have the purpose to have build communities and build relations, and know that whatever the impact is in that moment, that that will live on through us and through our bodies.

Speaker 1

A last like question to like, cap this off,  I'm curious about like archives in like 100 years, whether they'll include like people's emails or like Twitter feeds or like screenshots, and just thinking about the role of like, we produce and share so much knowledge and information in the digital space. So do you have thoughts on how our stuff in the digital space should be kept archived? Like, what would that look like? A specific specifically in regards to like, black traditions, black imaginaries?

Speaker 2

I don't really know what it should look like, but I don't know what it should feel like. And with like feeling, I would think it should feel safe, because I think some like, a big feeling that has come up like for the past few weeks, and that we have also talked about a lot, it's just that the online spaces do not feel safe right now to archive our like experiences and lives on through due to just meta and not having your own rights to it to due to AI, but also just the idea of, like, I don't know, like, when platforms just kind of stop, like, I would think back about how it's like, 11 year old, I would have this website on this Dutch platform, sick club print now, which was Like, I think it was Dutch and from Belgium, and then at some point it just like stopped, and I lost, like, my whole website. And I've had that too with another platform that was also Dutch platform hives, which was kind of similar to, like, Myspace slash Facebook, but then a Dutch version, and then when that stopped, you also lost everything. And I'm like, wow. Like, I would love to still have access to it and see what I posted when I was 11. Yeah, because that would be like, cool to see right now. But I don't know. I feel like digital spaces just feel sometimes like you don't really have any grip on it, even though you engage with it so much. But like, if they just decide, like, oh, we quit, like you lose everything, even if you save it, like you lose the page the way it looked, you know? So I think, like, that is just something I feel a lot of tension in right now, and yeah, so I'm not really sure like how it should look, but I think the biggest thing is just the feeling of safety and feeling that it is like reliable and protected and really made for the purpose of archiving or just for the purpose of just people and love and joy, and not for the purpose of commercial stuff. And, you know, like, I remember when Instagram was just, I don't know, just post. Hosting fun selfies, and now you have people making a living of it and earning 10k a month doing sponsorship sponsorships with some random, good, random brands, you know, like, it has completely changed, and I would just like to have a platform that is truly for the people and truly just for the fun of saving our images work.

Speaker 1

Okay, thank you so much. I'm gonna stop this

Transcribed by https://otter.ai